1.3. REASONING ABOUT CORRECTNESS

13

example, the ExhaustiveScheduling algorithm on page 10 would have better
been written in English as:

ExhaustiveScheduling(I)

Test all 2n subsets of intervals from I, and return the largest subset

consisting of mutually non-overlapping intervals.

Take-Home Lesson: The heart of any algorithm is an idea. If your idea is
not clearly revealed when you express an algorithm, then you are using too
low-level a notation to describe it.

1.3.3 Demonstrating Incorrectness

The best way to prove that an algorithm is incorrect is to produce an instance on
which it yields an incorrect answer. Such instances are called counterexamples.
No rational person will ever defend the correctness of an algorithm after a
counter-example has been identiﬁed. Very simple instances can instantly defeat
reasonable-looking heuristics with a quick touch´e. Good counterexamples have
two important properties:

• Veriﬁability – To demonstrate that a particular instance is a counterex-
ample to a particular algorithm, you must be able to (1) calculate what
answer your algorithm will give in this instance, and (2) display a better
answer so as to prove that the algorithm didn’t ﬁnd it.

• Simplicity – Good counter-examples have all unnecessary details stripped
away. They make clear exactly why the proposed algorithm fails. Simplic-
ity is important because you must be able to hold the given instance in
your head in order to reason about it. Once a counterexample has been
found, it is worth simplifying it down to its essence. For example, the
counterexample of Figure 1.6(l) could have been made simpler and better
by reducing the number of overlapped segments from ﬁve to two.

Hunting for counterexamples is a skill worth developing.

It bears some
similarity to the task of developing test sets for computer programs, but relies
more on inspiration than exhaustion. Here are some techniques to aid your
quest:

• Think small – Note that the robot tour counter-examples I presented
boiled down to six points or less, and the scheduling counter-examples
to only three intervals. This is indicative of the fact that when algorithms
fail, there is usually a very simple example on which they fail. Amateur
algorists tend to draw a big messy instance and then stare at it helplessly.
The pros look carefully at several small examples, because they are easier
to verify and reason about.

14

CHAPTER 1.

INTRODUCTION TO ALGORITHM DESIGN

• Think exhaustively – There are usually only a small number of possible
instances for the ﬁrst non-trivial value of n. For example, there are only
three distinct ways two intervals on the line can occur: as disjoint intervals,
as overlapping intervals, and as properly nesting intervals, one within the
other. All cases of three intervals (including counter-examples to both of
the movie heuristics) can be systematically constructed by adding a third
segment in each possible way to these three instances.

• Hunt for the weakness – If a proposed algorithm is of the form “always
take the biggest” (better known as the greedy algorithm), think about why
that might prove to be the wrong thing to do. In particular, . . .

• Go for a tie – A devious way to break a greedy heuristic is to provide
instances where everything is the same size. Suddenly the heuristic has
nothing to base its decision on, and perhaps has the freedom to return
something suboptimal as the answer.

• Seek extremes – Many counter-examples are mixtures of huge and tiny,
left and right, few and many, near and far. It is usually easier to verify or
reason about extreme examples than more muddled ones. Consider two
tightly bunched clouds of points separated by a much larger distance d.
The optimal TSP tour will be essentially 2d regardless of the number of
points, because what happens within each cloud doesn’t really matter.

Take-Home Lesson: Searching for counterexamples is the best way to disprove
the correctness of a heuristic.

Stop and Think: Greedy Movie Stars?

Problem: Recall the movie star scheduling problem, where we seek to ﬁnd the
largest possible set of non-overlapping intervals in a given set S. A natural
greedy heuristic selects the interval i, which overlaps the smallest number of
other intervals in S, removes them, and repeats until no intervals remain.

Give a counter-example to this proposed algorithm.

Solution: Consider the counter-example in Figure 1.7. The largest possible
independent set consists of the four intervals in red, but the interval of lowest
degree (shown in pink) overlaps two of these, After we grab it, we are doomed
to ﬁnding a solution of only three intervals.

But how would you go about constructing such an example? My thought
process started with an odd-length chain of intervals, each of which overlaps
one interval to the left and one to the right. Picking an even-length chain would
mess up the optimal solution (hunt for the weakness). All intervals overlap two
others, except for the left and right-most intervals (go for the tie). To make
these terminal intervals unattractive, we can pile other intervals on top of them

1.4.

INDUCTION AND RECURSION

15

Figure 1.7: Counter-example to the greedy heuristic for movie star scheduling.
Picking the pink interval, which intersects the fewest others, blocks us from the
optimal solution (the four red intervals).

(seek extremes). The length of our chain (7) is the shortest that permits this
construction to work.

1.4

Induction and Recursion

Failure to ﬁnd a counterexample to a given algorithm does not mean “it is
obvious” that the algorithm is correct. A proof or demonstration of correctness
is needed. Often mathematical induction is the method of choice.

When I ﬁrst learned about mathematical induction it seemed like complete
n
i=1 i = n(n + 1)/2 for some basis case like
magic. You proved a formula like
n = 1 or 2, then assumed it was true all the way to n − 1 before proving it was
in fact true for general n using the assumption. That was a proof? Ridiculous!
When I ﬁrst learned the programming technique of recursion it also seemed
like complete magic. The program tested whether the input argument was some
basis case like 1 or 2. If not, you solved the bigger case by breaking it into pieces
and calling the subprogram itself to solve these pieces. That was a program?
Ridiculous!

(cid:3)

The reason both seemed like magic is because recursion is mathematical
induction in action. In both, we have general and boundary conditions, with
the general condition breaking the problem into smaller and smaller pieces. The
initial or boundary condition terminates the recursion. Once you understand
either recursion or induction, you should be able to see why the other one also
works.

I’ve heard it said that a computer scientist is a mathematician who only
knows how to prove things by induction. This is partially true because computer
scientists are lousy at proving things, but primarily because so many of the
algorithms we study are either recursive or incremental.

Consider the correctness of insertion sort, which we introduced at the be-

ginning of this chapter. The reason it is correct can be shown inductively:

16

CHAPTER 1.

INTRODUCTION TO ALGORITHM DESIGN

Figure 1.8: Large-scale changes in the optimal solution (red boxes) after insert-
ing a single interval (dashed) into the instance.

• The basis case consists of a single element, and by deﬁnition a one-element

array is completely sorted.

• We assume that the ﬁrst n − 1 elements of array A are completely sorted

after n − 1 iterations of insertion sort.

• To insert one last element x to A, we ﬁnd where it goes, namely the unique
spot between the biggest element less than or equal to x and the smallest
element greater than x. This is done by moving all the greater elements
back by one position, creating room for x in the desired location.

One must be suspicious of inductive proofs, however, because very subtle
reasoning errors can creep in. The ﬁrst are boundary errors. For example,
our insertion sort correctness proof above boldly stated that there was a unique
place to insert x between two elements, when our basis case was a single-element
array. Greater care is needed to properly deal with the special cases of inserting
the minimum or maximum elements.

The second and more common class of inductive proof errors concerns cava-
lier extension claims. Adding one extra item to a given problem instance might
cause the entire optimal solution to change. This was the case in our scheduling
problem (see Figure 1.8). The optimal schedule after inserting a new segment
may contain none of the segments of any particular optimal solution prior to
insertion. Boldly ignoring such diﬃculties can lead to very convincing inductive
proofs of incorrect algorithms.

Take-Home Lesson: Mathematical induction is usually the right way to verify
the correctness of a recursive or incremental insertion algorithm.

Stop and Think: Incremental Correctness

Problem: Prove the correctness of the following recursive algorithm for incre-
menting natural numbers, that is, y → y + 1:

Increment(y)

if (y = 0) then return(1) else
if (y mod 2) = 1 then

return(2 · Increment((cid:8)y/2(cid:9)))

else return(y + 1)

1.5. MODELING THE PROBLEM

17

Solution: The correctness of this algorithm is certainly not obvious to me. But
as it is recursive and I am a computer scientist, my natural instinct is to try to
prove it by induction. The basis case of y = 0 is obviously correctly handled.
Clearly the value 1 is returned, and 0 + 1 = 1.

Now assume the function works correctly for the general case of y = n − 1.
Given this, we must demonstrate the truth for the case of y = n. The cases
corresponding to even numbers are obvious, because y + 1 is explicitly returned
when (y mod 2) = 0.

For odd numbers, the answer depends on what Increment((cid:8)y/2(cid:9)) returns.
Here we want to use our inductive assumption, but it isn’t quite right. We have
assumed that Increment worked correctly for y = n − 1, but not for a value that
is about half of it. We can ﬁx this problem by strengthening our assumption to
declare that the general case holds for all y ≤ n − 1. This costs us nothing in
principle, but is necessary to establish the correctness of the algorithm.

Now, the case of odd y (i.e. y = 2m + 1 for some integer m) can be dealt

with as:

2 · Increment((cid:8)(2m + 1)/2(cid:9)) = 2 · Increment((cid:8)m + 1/2(cid:9))

= 2 · Increment(m)
= 2(m + 1)
= 2m + 2 = y + 1

and the general case is resolved.

1.5 Modeling the Problem

Modeling is the art of formulating your application in terms of precisely de-
scribed, well-understood problems. Proper modeling is the key to applying
algorithmic design techniques to real-world problems.
Indeed, proper model-
ing can eliminate the need to design or even implement algorithms, by relating
your application to what has been done before. Proper modeling is the key to
eﬀectively using the “Hitchhiker’s Guide” in Part II of this book.

Real-world applications involve real-world objects. You might be working on
a system to route traﬃc in a network, to ﬁnd the best way to schedule classrooms
in a university, or to search for patterns in a corporate database. Most algo-
rithms, however, are designed to work on rigorously deﬁned abstract structures
such as permutations, graphs, and sets. To exploit the algorithms literature,
you must learn to describe your problem abstractly, in terms of procedures on
such fundamental structures.

1.5.1 Combinatorial Objects

Odds are very good that others have probably stumbled upon any algorithmic
problem you care about, perhaps in substantially diﬀerent contexts. But to ﬁnd

18

CHAPTER 1.

INTRODUCTION TO ALGORITHM DESIGN

Sol

Stony Brook

Greenport

Morris

Eve

Sid

Riverhead

Shelter Island

Steve

Len

Rob

Richard

Laurie

Jim

Lisa

Jeff

Islip

Sag Harbor

Figure 1.9: Modeling real-world structures with trees and graphs.

Orient Point

Montauk

out what is known about your particular “widget optimization problem,” you
can’t hope to ﬁnd it in a book under widget. You must ﬁrst formulate widget
optimization in terms of computing properties of common structures such as
those described below:

• Permutations are arrangements, or orderings, of items. For example,
{1, 4, 3, 2} and {4, 3, 2, 1} are two distinct permutations of the same set
of four integers. We have already seen permutations in the robot opti-
mization problem, and in sorting. Permutations are likely the object in
question whenever your problem seeks an “arrangement,” “tour,” “order-
ing,” or “sequence.”

• Subsets represent selections from a set of items. For example, {1, 3, 4}
and {2} are two distinct subsets of the ﬁrst four integers. Order does
not matter in subsets the way it does with permutations, so the subsets
{1, 3, 4} and {4, 3, 1} would be considered identical. Subsets arose as can-
didate solutions in the movie scheduling problem. They are likely the
object in question whenever your problem seeks a “cluster,” “collection,”
“committee,” “group,” “packaging,” or “selection.”

• Trees represent hierarchical relationships between items. Figure 1.9(a)
Trees are likely the
shows part of the family tree of the Skiena clan.
object in question whenever your problem seeks a “hierarchy,” “dominance
relationship,” “ancestor/descendant relationship,” or “taxonomy.”

• Graphs represent relationships between arbitrary pairs of objects. Figure
1.9(b) models a network of roads as a graph, where the vertices are cities
and the edges are roads connecting pairs of cities. Graphs are likely the
object in question whenever you seek a “network,” “circuit,” “web,” or
“relationship.”

• Points deﬁne locations in some geometric space. For example, the loca-
tions of McDonald’s restaurants can be described by points on a map/plane.
Points are likely the object in question whenever your problems work on
“sites,” “positions,” “data records,” or “locations.”

1.5. MODELING THE PROBLEM

19

• Polygons deﬁne regions in some geometric spaces. For example, the bor-
ders of a country can be described by a polygon on a map/plane. Polygons
and polyhedra are likely the object in question whenever you are working
on “shapes,” “regions,” “conﬁgurations,” or “boundaries.”

• Strings represent sequences of characters, or patterns. For example, the
names of students in a class can be represented by strings. Strings are
likely the object in question whenever you are dealing with “text,” “char-
acters,” “patterns,” or “labels.”

These fundamental structures all have associated algorithm problems, which
are presented in the catalog of Part II. Familiarity with these problems is im-
portant, because they provide the language we use to model applications. To
become ﬂuent in this vocabulary, browse through the catalog and study the in-
put and output pictures for each problem. Understanding these problems, even
at a cartoon/deﬁnition level, will enable you to know where to look later when
the problem arises in your application.

Examples of successful application modeling will be presented in the war
stories spaced throughout this book. However, some words of caution are in
order. The act of modeling reduces your application to one of a small number
of existing problems and structures. Such a process is inherently constraining,
and certain details might not ﬁt easily into the given target problem. Also,
certain problems can be modeled in several diﬀerent ways, some much better
than others.

Modeling is only the ﬁrst step in designing an algorithm for a problem. Be
alert for how the details of your applications diﬀer from a candidate model, but
don’t be too quick to say that your problem is unique and special. Temporarily
ignoring details that don’t ﬁt can free the mind to ask whether they really were
fundamental in the ﬁrst place.

Take-Home Lesson: Modeling your application in terms of well-deﬁned struc-
tures and algorithms is the most important single step towards a solution.

1.5.2 Recursive Objects

Learning to think recursively is learning to look for big things that are made
from smaller things of exactly the same type as the big thing. If you think of
houses as sets of rooms, then adding or deleting a room still leaves a house
behind.

Recursive structures occur everywhere in the algorithmic world. Indeed, each
of the abstract structures described above can be thought about recursively. You
just have to see how you can break them down, as shown in Figure 1.10:

• Permutations – Delete the ﬁrst element of a permutation of n things
{1, . . . , n} and you get a permutation of the remaining n − 1 things. This
may require renumbering to keep the object a permutation of consecu-
tive integers. For example, removing the ﬁrst element of {4, 1, 5, 2, 3} and

20

CHAPTER 1.

INTRODUCTION TO ALGORITHM DESIGN

{4,1,5,2,3}

{1,2,7,9}

4 −

9 −

4

 {1,4,2,3}

 {1,2,7}
9

A L G O R I T H M

A L G O R I T H M

Figure 1.10: Recursive decompositions of combinatorial objects. Permutations,
subsets, trees, and graphs (left column). Point sets, polygons, and strings (right
column). Note that the elements of a permutation of {1, . . . , n} get renumbered
after element deletion in order to remain a permutation of {1, . . . , n − 1}.

renumbering gives {1, 4, 2, 3}, a permutation of {1, 2, 3, 4}. Permutations
are recursive objects.

• Subsets – Every subset of {1, . . . , n} contains a subset of {1, . . . , n − 1}
obtained by deleting element n, if it is present. Subsets are recursive
objects.

• Trees – Delete the root of a tree and what do you get? A collection of
smaller trees. Delete any leaf of a tree and what do you get? A slightly
smaller tree. Trees are recursive objects.

• Graphs – Delete any vertex from a graph, and you get a smaller graph.
Now divide the vertices of a graph into two groups, left and right. Cut
through all edges that span from left to right, and what do you get? Two
smaller graphs, and a bunch of broken edges. Graphs are recursive objects.

• Points – Take a cloud of points, and separate them into two groups by
drawing a line. Now you have two smaller clouds of points. Point sets are
recursive objects.

• Polygons – Inserting any internal chord between two non-adjacent ver-
tices of a simple polygon cuts it into two smaller polygons. Polygons are
recursive objects.

• Strings – Delete the ﬁrst character from a string, and what do you get?

A shorter string. Strings are recursive objects.1

1An alert reader of the previous edition observed that salads are recursive objects, in ways
that hamburgers are not. Take a bite (or an ingredient) out of a salad, and what is left is a
smaller salad. Take a bite out of a hamburger, and what is left is something disgusting.

1.6. PROOF BY CONTRADICTION

21

Recursive descriptions of objects require both decomposition rules and basis
cases, namely the speciﬁcation of the smallest and simplest objects where the
decomposition stops. These basis cases are usually easily deﬁned. Permutations
and subsets of zero things presumably look like {}. The smallest interesting tree
or graph consists of a single vertex, while the smallest interesting point cloud
consists of a single point. Polygons are a little trickier; the smallest genuine
simple polygon is a triangle. Finally, the empty string has zero characters in it.
The decision of whether the basis case contains zero or one element is more a
question of taste and convenience than any fundamental principle.

Recursive decompositions will deﬁne many of the algorithms we will see in

this book. Keep your eyes open for them.

1.6 Proof by Contradiction

Although some computer scientists only know how to prove things by induction,
this isn’t true of everyone. The best sometimes use contradiction.
The basic scheme of a contradiction argument is as follows:
• Assume that the hypothesis (the statement you want to prove) is false.
• Develop some logical consequences of this assumption.
• Show that one consequence is demonstrably false, thereby showing that

the assumption is incorrect and the hypothesis is true.

The classic contradiction argument is Euclid’s proof that there are an inﬁnite
integers n like 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, . . . that have no non-
number of prime numbers:
trivial factors, only 1 and n itself. The negation of the claim would be that there
are only a ﬁnite number of primes, say m, which can be listed as p1, . . . , pm. So
let’s assume this is the case and work with it.

Prime numbers have particular properties with respect to division. Suppose

we construct the integer formed as the product of “all” of the listed primes:

m

N =

pi

This integer N has the property that it is divisible by each and every one of the
known primes, because of how it was built.

i=1
(cid:4)

But consider the integer N + 1. It can’t be divisible by p1 = 2, because N is.
The same is true for p2 = 3 and every other listed prime. Since N + 1 doesn’t
have any non-trivial factor, this means it must be prime. But you asserted that
there are exactly m prime numbers, none of which are N + 1. This assertion is
false, so there cannot be a bounded number of primes. Touch´e!

For a contradiction argument to be convincing, the ﬁnal consequence must
be clearly, ridiculously false. Muddy outcomes are not convincing. It is also
important that this contradiction be a logical consequence of the assumption.
We will see contradiction arguments for minimum spanning tree algorithms in
Section 8.1.

22

CHAPTER 1.

INTRODUCTION TO ALGORITHM DESIGN

1.7 About the War Stories

The best way to learn how careful algorithm design can have a huge impact on
performance is to look at real-world case studies. By carefully studying other
people’s experiences, we learn how they might apply to our work.

Scattered throughout this text are several of my own algorithmic war sto-
ries, presenting our successful (and occasionally unsuccessful) algorithm design
eﬀorts on real applications. I hope that you will be able to internalize these
experiences so that they will serve as models for your own attacks on problems.
Every one of the war stories is true. Of course, the stories improve somewhat
in the retelling, and the dialogue has been punched up to make them more
interesting to read. However, I have tried to honestly trace the process of going
from a raw problem to a solution, so you can watch how this process unfolded.
The Oxford English Dictionary deﬁnes an algorist as “one skillful in reckon-
ings or ﬁguring.” In these stories, I have tried to capture some of the mindset
of the algorist in action as they attack a problem.

The war stories often involve at least one problem from the problem catalog
in Part II. I reference the appropriate section of the catalog when such a problem
occurs. This emphasizes the beneﬁts of modeling your application in terms of
standard algorithm problems. By using the catalog, you will be able to pull out
what is known about any given problem whenever it is needed.

1.8 War Story: Psychic Modeling

The call came for me out of the blue as I sat in my oﬃce.

“Professor Skiena, I hope you can help me.

I’m the President of Lotto
Systems Group Inc., and we need an algorithm for a problem arising in our
latest product.”

“Sure,” I replied. After all, the dean of my engineering school is always

encouraging our faculty to interact more with industry.

“At Lotto Systems Group, we market a program designed to improve our
customers’ psychic ability to predict winning lottery numbers.2 In a standard
lottery, each ticket consists of six numbers selected from, say, 1 to 44. However,
after proper training, our clients can visualize (say) ﬁfteen numbers out of the
44 and be certain that at least four of them will be on the winning ticket. Are
you with me so far?”

“Probably not,” I replied. But then I recalled how my dean encourages us

to interact with industry.

“Our problem is this. After the psychic has narrowed the choices down to
ﬁfteen numbers and is certain that at least four of them will be on the winning
ticket, we must ﬁnd the most eﬃcient way to exploit this information. Suppose
a cash prize is awarded whenever you pick at least three of the correct numbers
on your ticket. We need an algorithm to construct the smallest set of tickets
that we must buy in order to guarantee that we win at least one prize.”

2Yes, this is a true story.

1.8. WAR STORY: PSYCHIC MODELING

23

Tickets

1  2  3 
1  4  5 
2  4  5 
3  4  5

Winning Pairs

1  2     
1  3 
1  4 
1  5

2  3 
2  4 
2  5 

3  4 
3  5 
4  5 

Figure 1.11: Covering all pairs of {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} with tickets {1, 2, 3}, {1, 4, 5},
{2, 4, 5}, {3, 4, 5}. Pair color reﬂects the covering ticket.

“Assuming the psychic is correct?”
“Yes, assuming the psychic is correct. We need a program that prints out
a list of all the tickets that the psychic should buy in order to minimize their
investment. Can you help us?”

Maybe they did have psychic ability, for they had come to the right place.
Identifying the best subset of tickets to buy was very much a combinatorial
algorithm problem. It was going to be some type of covering problem, where
each ticket bought would “cover” some of the possible 4-element subsets of the
psychic’s set. Finding the absolute smallest set of tickets to cover everything was
a special instance of the NP-complete problem set cover (discussed in Section
21.1 (page 678)), and presumably computationally intractable.

It was indeed a special instance of set cover, completely speciﬁed by only
four numbers: the size n of the candidate set S (typically n ≈ 15), the number of
slots k for numbers on each ticket (typically k ≈ 6), the number of psychically-
promised correct numbers j from S (say j = 4), and ﬁnally, the number of
matching numbers l necessary to win a prize (say l = 3). Figure 1.11 illustrates
a covering of a smaller instance, where n = 5, k = 3, and l = 2, and no psychic
contribution (meaning j = 5).

“Although it will be hard to ﬁnd the exact minimum set of tickets to buy,
with heuristics I should be able to get you pretty close to the cheapest covering
ticket set,” I told him. “Will that be good enough?”

“So long as it generates better ticket sets than my competitor’s program,
that will be ﬁne. His system doesn’t always guarantee a win. I really appreciate
your help on this, Professor Skiena.”

“One last thing. If your program can train people to pick lottery winners,

why don’t you use it to win the lottery yourself?”

“I look forward to talking to you again real soon, Professor Skiena. Thanks

for the help.”

I hung up the phone and got back to thinking. It seemed like the perfect
project to give to a bright undergraduate. After modeling it in terms of sets
and subsets, the basic components of a solution seemed fairly straightforward:

• We needed the ability to generate all subsets of k numbers from the can-
didate set S. Algorithms for generating and ranking/unranking subsets of
sets are presented in Section 17.5 (page 521).

 
 
 
 
 
24

CHAPTER 1.

INTRODUCTION TO ALGORITHM DESIGN

• We needed the right formulation of what it meant to have a covering set
of purchased tickets. The obvious criteria would be to pick a small set of
tickets such that we have purchased at least one ticket containing each of
the

l-subsets of S that might pay oﬀ with the prize.

n
l

(cid:5)

(cid:6)

• We needed to keep track of which prize combinations we have thus far
covered. We seek tickets to cover as many thus-far-uncovered prize com-
binations as possible. The currently covered combinations are a subset of
all possible combinations. Data structures for subsets are discussed in Sec-
tion 15.5 (page 456). The best candidate seemed to be a bit vector, which
would answer in constant time “is this combination already covered?”

• We needed a search mechanism to decide which ticket to buy next. For
small enough set sizes, we could do an exhaustive search over all possible
subsets of tickets and pick the smallest one. For larger problems, a ran-
domized search process like simulated annealing (see Section 12.6.3 (page
406)) would select tickets-to-buy to cover as many uncovered combina-
tions as possible. By repeating this randomized procedure several times
and picking the best solution, we would be likely to come up with a good
set of tickets.

The bright undergraduate, Fayyaz Younas, rose to the challenge. Based
on this framework, he implemented a brute-force search algorithm and found
optimal solutions for problems with n ≤ 5 in a reasonable time. He implemented
a random search procedure to solve larger problems, tweaking it for a while
before settling on the best variant. Finally, the day arrived when we could call
Lotto Systems Group and announce that we had solved the problem.

“Our program found an optimal solution for n = 15, k = 6, j = 4, l = 3

meant buying 28 tickets.”

“Twenty-eight tickets!” complained the president. “You must have a bug.
Look, these ﬁve tickets will suﬃce to cover everything twice over: {2, 4, 8, 10, 13, 14},
{4, 5, 7, 8, 12, 15}, {1, 2, 3, 6, 11, 13}, {3, 5, 6, 9, 10, 15}, {1, 7, 9, 11, 12, 14}.” We
ﬁddled with this example for a while before admitting that he was right.

We hadn’t modeled the problem correctly! In fact, we didn’t need to explicitly
cover all possible winning combinations. Figure 1.12 illustrates the principle by
giving a two-ticket solution to our previous four-ticket example. Although the
pairs {2, 4}, {2, 5}, {3, 4}, or {3, 5} do not explicitly appear in one of our two
tickets, these pairs plus any possible third ticket number must create a pair in
either {1, 2, 3} or {1, 4, 5}. We were trying to cover too many combinations, and
the penny-pinching psychics were unwilling to pay for such extravagance.

Fortunately, this story has a happy ending. The general outline of our search-
based solution still holds for the real problem. All we must ﬁx is which subsets
we get credit for covering with a given set of tickets. After this modiﬁcation,
we obtained the kind of results they were hoping for. Lotto Systems Group
gratefully accepted our program to incorporate into their product, and we hope
they hit the jackpot with it.

1.9. ESTIMATION

25

Tickets

1  2   3
1  4   5

Winning Pairs

1  2
1  3
1  4
1  5

2  3
2  4
2  5

3  4
3  5
4  5

2 4

1

3

5

{1 2 3}

{1 4 5}

2 5

1

3

4

{1 2 3}

{1 4 5}

3 4

1

2

5

{1 2 3}

{1 4 5}

3 5

1

2

4

{1 2 3}

{1 4 5}

Figure 1.12: Guaranteeing a winning pair from {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} using only tickets
{1, 2, 3} and {1, 4, 5}. The bottom ﬁgure shows how all missing pairs imply a
covered pair on expansion.

The moral of this story is to make sure that you model your problem cor-
rectly before trying to solve it. In our case, we came up with a reasonable model,
but didn’t work hard enough to validate it before we started to program. Our
misinterpretation would have become obvious had we worked out a small ex-
ample by hand and bounced it oﬀ our sponsor before beginning work. Our
success in recovering from this error is a tribute to the basic correctness of our
initial formulation, and our use of well-deﬁned abstractions for such tasks as (1)
ranking/unranking k-subsets, (2) the set data structure, and (3) combinatorial
search.

1.9 Estimation

When you don’t know the right answer, the best thing to do is guess. Principled
guessing is called estimation. The ability to make back-of-the-envelope estimates
of diverse quantities such as the running time of a program is a valuable skill in
algorithm design, as it is in any technical enterprise.

Estimation problems are best solved through some kind of logical reasoning
process, typically a mix of principled calculations and analogies. Principled
calculations give the answer as a function of quantities that either you already
know, can look up on Google, or feel conﬁdent enough to guess. Analogies
reference your past experiences, recalling those that seem similar to some aspect
of the problem at hand.

I once asked my class to estimate the number of pennies in a hefty glass jar,
and got answers ranging from 250 to 15,000. Both answers will seem pretty silly
if you make the right analogies:

• A penny roll holds 50 coins in a tube roughly the length and width of your
biggest ﬁnger. So ﬁve such rolls can easily be held in your hand, with no
need for a hefty jar.

26

CHAPTER 1.

INTRODUCTION TO ALGORITHM DESIGN

• 15,000 pennies means $150 in value. I have never managed to accumulate
that much value in coins even in a hefty pile of change—and here I am
only using pennies!

But the class average estimate proved very close to the right answer, which
turned out to be 1879. There are at least three principled ways I can think of
to estimate the number of coins in the jar:

• Volume – The jar was a cylinder with about 5 inches diameter, and the
coins probably reached a level equal to about ten pennies tall stacked end
to end. Figure a penny is ten times longer than it is thick. The bottom
layer of the jar was a circle of radius about ﬁve pennies. So

(10 × 10) × (π × 2.52) ≈ 1962.5

• Weight – Lugging the jar felt like carrying around a bowling ball. Mul-
tiplying the number of US pennies in a pound (181 when I looked it up)
times a 10 lb. ball gave a frighteningly accurate estimate of 1810.

• Analogy – The coins had a height of about 8 inches in the jar, or twice
that of a penny roll. Figure I could stack about two layers of ten rolls per
layer in the jar, or a total estimate of 1,000 coins.

A best practice in estimation is to try to solve the problem in diﬀerent ways
and see if the answers generally agree in magnitude. All of these are within a
factor of two of each other, giving me conﬁdence that my answer is about right.
Try some of the estimation exercises at the end of this chapter, and see how
many diﬀerent ways you can approach them. If you do things right, the ratio
between your high and low estimates should be somewhere within a factor of two
to ten, depending upon the nature of the problem. A sound reasoning process
matters a lot more here than the actual numbers you get.

Chapter Notes

Every algorithm book reﬂects the design philosophy of its author. For stu-
dents seeking alternative presentations and viewpoints, I particularly recom-
mend the books of Cormen, et al. [CLRS09], Kleinberg and Tardos [KT06],
Manber [Man89], and Roughgarden [Rou17].

Formal proofs of algorithm correctness are important, and deserve a fuller
discussion than this chapter is able to provide. See Gries [Gri89] for a thorough
introduction to the techniques of program veriﬁcation.

The movie scheduling problem represents a very special case of the general
independent set problem, which will be discussed in Section 19.2 (page 589).
The restriction limits the allowable input instances to interval graphs, where
the vertices of the graph G can be represented by intervals on the line and
(i, j) is an edge of G iﬀ the intervals overlap. Golumbic [Gol04] provides a full
treatment of this interesting and important class of graphs.

1.10. EXERCISES

27

Jon Bentley’s Programming Pearls columns are probably the best known
collection of algorithmic “war stories,” collected in two books [Ben90, Ben99].
Brooks’s The Mythical Man Month [Bro95] is another wonderful collection of
war stories that, although focused more on software engineering than algorithm
design, remain a source of considerable wisdom. Every programmer should read
these books for pleasure as well as insight.

Our solution to the lotto ticket set covering problem is presented in more

detail in Younas and Skiena [YS96].

1.10 Exercises

Finding Counterexamples

1-1. [3] Show that a + b can be less than min(a, b).
1-2. [3] Show that a × b can be less than min(a, b).

1-3. [5] Design/draw a road network with two points a and b such that the fastest

route between a and b is not the shortest route.

1-4. [5] Design/draw a road network with two points a and b such that the shortest

route between a and b is not the route with the fewest turns.

1-5. [4] The knapsack problem is as follows: given a set of integers S = {s1, s2, . . . , sn},
and a target number T , ﬁnd a subset of S that adds up exactly to T . For ex-
ample, there exists a subset within S = {1, 2, 5, 9, 10} that adds up to T = 22
but not T = 23.
Find counterexamples to each of the following algorithms for the knapsack prob-
lem. That is, give an S and T where the algorithm does not ﬁnd a solution that
leaves the knapsack completely full, even though a full-knapsack solution exists.

(a) Put the elements of S in the knapsack in left to right order if they ﬁt, that

is, the ﬁrst-ﬁt algorithm.

(b) Put the elements of S in the knapsack from smallest to largest, that is, the

best-ﬁt algorithm.

(c) Put the elements of S in the knapsack from largest to smallest.

1-6. [5] The set cover problem is as follows: given a set S of subsets S1, . . . , Sm of
the universal set U = {1, ..., n}, ﬁnd the smallest subset of subsets T ⊆ S such
that ∪ti∈T ti = U . For example, consider the subsets S1 = {1, 3, 5}, S2 = {2, 4},
S3 = {1, 4}, and S4 = {2, 5}. The set cover of {1, . . . , 5} would then be S1 and
S2.
Find a counterexample for the following algorithm: Select the largest subset for
the cover, and then delete all its elements from the universal set. Repeat by
adding the subset containing the largest number of uncovered elements until all
are covered.

1-7. [5] The maximum clique problem in a graph G = (V, E) asks for the largest
subset C of vertices V such that there is an edge in E between every pair of
vertices in C. Find a counterexample for the following algorithm: Sort the
vertices of G from highest to lowest degree. Considering the vertices in order

28

CHAPTER 1.

INTRODUCTION TO ALGORITHM DESIGN

of degree, for each vertex add it to the clique if it is a neighbor of all vertices
currently in the clique. Repeat until all vertices have been considered.

Proofs of Correctness

1-8. [3] Prove the correctness of the following recursive algorithm to multiply two

natural numbers, for all integer constants c ≥ 2.

Multiply(y, z)

if z = 0 then return(0) else
return(Multiply(cy, (cid:5)z/c(cid:6)) + y · (z mod c))

1-9. [3] Prove the correctness of the following algorithm for evaluating a polynomial

anxn + an−1xn−1 + · · · + a1x + a0.

Horner(a, x)
p = an
for i from n − 1 to 0

p = p · x + ai

return p

1-10. [3] Prove the correctness of the following sorting algorithm.

Bubblesort (A)

for i from n to 1

for j from 1 to i − 1

if (A[j] > A[j + 1])

swap the values of A[j] and A[j + 1]

1-11. [5] The greatest common divisor of positive integers x and y is the largest integer
d such that d divides x and d divides y. Euclid’s algorithm to compute gcd(x, y)
where x > y reduces the task to a smaller problem:

gcd(x, y) = gcd(y, x mod y)

Prove that Euclid’s algorithm is correct.

Induction

1-12. [3] Prove that

1-13. [3] Prove that

1-14. [3] Prove that

1-15. [3] Prove that

(cid:2)n
(cid:2)n
(cid:2)n

i=1 i = n(n + 1)/2 for n ≥ 0, by induction.
i=1 i2 = n(n + 1)(2n + 1)/6 for n ≥ 0, by induction.
i=1 i3 = n2(n + 1)2/4 for n ≥ 0, by induction.

n(cid:3)

i=1

i(i + 1)(i + 2) = n(n + 1)(n + 2)(n + 3)/4

1-16. [5] Prove by induction on n ≥ 1 that for every a (cid:7)= 1,

n(cid:3)

i=0

ai =

an+1 − 1
a − 1

1.10. EXERCISES

29

1-17. [3] Prove by induction that for n ≥ 1,

n(cid:3)

i=1

1
i(i + 1)

=

n
n + 1

1-18. [3] Prove by induction that n3 + 2n is divisible by 3 for all n ≥ 0.
1-19. [3] Prove by induction that a tree with n vertices has exactly n − 1 edges.

1-20. [3] Prove by induction that the sum of the cubes of the ﬁrst n positive integers

is equal to the square of the sum of these integers, that is,

n(cid:3)

i=1

i3 = (

n(cid:3)

i=1

i)2

Estimation

1-21. [3] Do all the books you own total at least one million pages? How many total

pages are stored in your school library?

1-22. [3] How many words are there in this textbook?

1-23. [3] How many hours are one million seconds? How many days? Answer these

questions by doing all arithmetic in your head.

1-24. [3] Estimate how many cities and towns there are in the United States.

1-25. [3] Estimate how many cubic miles of water ﬂow out of the mouth of the
Mississippi River each day. Do not look up any supplemental facts. Describe all
assumptions you made in arriving at your answer.

1-26. [3] How many Starbucks or McDonald’s locations are there in your country?

1-27. [3] How long would it take to empty a bathtub with a drinking straw?

1-28. [3] Is disk drive access time normally measured in milliseconds (thousandths of
a second) or microseconds (millionths of a second)? Does your RAM memory
access a word in more or less than a microsecond? How many instructions can
your CPU execute in one year if the machine is left running all the time?

1-29. [4] A sorting algorithm takes 1 second to sort 1,000 items on your machine.

How long will it take to sort 10,000 items. . .

(a) if you believe that the algorithm takes time proportional to n2, and

(b) if you believe that the algorithm takes time roughly proportional to n log n?

Implementation Projects

1-30. [5] Implement the two TSP heuristics of Section 1.1 (page 5). Which of them
gives better solutions in practice? Can you devise a heuristic that works better
than both of them?

1-31. [5] Describe how to test whether a given set of tickets establishes suﬃcient
coverage in the Lotto problem of Section 1.8 (page 22). Write a program to ﬁnd
good ticket sets.

30

CHAPTER 1.

INTRODUCTION TO ALGORITHM DESIGN

Interview Problems

1-32. [5] Write a function to perform integer division without using either the / or *

operators. Find a fast way to do it.

1-33. [5] There are twenty-ﬁve horses. At most, ﬁve horses can race together at a
time. You must determine the fastest, second fastest, and third fastest horses.
Find the minimum number of races in which this can be done.

1-34. [3] How many piano tuners are there in the entire world?

1-35. [3] How many gas stations are there in the United States?

1-36. [3] How much does the ice in a hockey rink weigh?

1-37. [3] How many miles of road are there in the United States?

1-38. [3] On average, how many times would you have to ﬂip open the Manhattan

phone book at random in order to ﬁnd a speciﬁc name?

LeetCode

1-1. https://leetcode.com/problems/daily-temperatures/

1-2. https://leetcode.com/problems/rotate-list/

1-3. https://leetcode.com/problems/wiggle-sort-ii/

HackerRank

1-1. https://www.hackerrank.com/challenges/array-left-rotation/

1-2. https://www.hackerrank.com/challenges/kangaroo/

1-3. https://www.hackerrank.com/challenges/hackerland-radio-transmitters/

Programming Challenges

These programming challenge problems with robot judging are available at
https://onlinejudge.org:

1-1. “The 3n + 1 Problem”—Chapter 1, problem 100.

1-2. “The Trip”—Chapter 1, problem 10137.

1-3. “Australian Voting”—Chapter 1, problem 10142.

Chapter 2

Algorithm Analysis

Algorithms are the most important and durable part of computer science be-
cause they can be studied in a language- and machine-independent way. This
means we need techniques that let us compare the eﬃciency of algorithms with-
out implementing them. Our two most important tools are (1) the RAM model
of computation and (2) the asymptotic analysis of computational complexity.

Assessing algorithmic performance makes use of the “Big Oh” notation that
proves essential to compare algorithms, and design better ones. This method
of keeping score will be the most mathematically demanding part of this book.
But once you understand the intuition behind this formalism it becomes a lot
easier to deal with.

2.1 The RAM Model of Computation

Machine-independent algorithm design depends upon a hypothetical computer
called the Random Access Machine, or RAM. Under this model of computation,
we are confronted with a computer where:

• Each simple operation (+, *, –, =, if, call) takes exactly one time step.

• Loops and subroutines are not considered simple operations.
Instead,
It makes no
they are the composition of many single-step operations.
sense for sort to be a single-step operation, since sorting 1,000,000 items
will certainly take much longer than sorting ten items. The time it takes
to run through a loop or execute a subprogram depends upon the number
of loop iterations or the speciﬁc nature of the subprogram.

• Each memory access takes exactly one time step. Furthermore, we have
as much memory as we need. The RAM model takes no notice of whether
an item is in cache or on the disk.

Under the RAM model, we measure run time by counting the number of
steps an algorithm takes on a given problem instance. If we assume that our

© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to
Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
S. S. Skiena, The Algorithm Design Manual, Texts in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-54256-6_2

31

32

CHAPTER 2. ALGORITHM ANALYSIS

RAM executes a given number of steps per second, this operation count converts
naturally to the actual running time.

The RAM is a simple model of how computers perform. Perhaps it sounds
too simple. After all, multiplying two numbers takes more time than adding two
numbers on most processors, which violates the ﬁrst assumption of the model.
Fancy compiler loop unrolling and hyperthreading may well violate the second
assumption. And certainly memory-access times diﬀer greatly depending on
where your data sits in the storage hierarchy. This makes us zero for three on
the truth of our basic assumptions.

And yet, despite these objections, the RAM proves an excellent model for
understanding how an algorithm will perform on a real computer. It strikes a
ﬁne balance by capturing the essential behavior of computers while being simple
to work with. We use the RAM model because it is useful in practice.

Every model in science has a size range over which it is useful. Take, for
example, the model that the Earth is ﬂat. You might argue that this is a bad
model, since it is quite well established that the Earth is round. But, when
laying the foundation of a house, the ﬂat Earth model is suﬃciently accurate
that it can be reliably used.
It is so much easier to manipulate a ﬂat-Earth
model that it is inconceivable that you would try to think spherically when you
don’t have to.1

The same situation is true with the RAM model of computation. We make
an abstraction that is generally very useful. It is diﬃcult to design an algorithm
where the RAM model gives you substantially misleading results. The robust-
ness of this model enables us to analyze algorithms in a machine-independent
way.

Take-Home Lesson: Algorithms can be understood and studied in a language-
and machine-independent manner.

2.1.1 Best-Case, Worst-Case, and Average-Case Complex-

ity

Using the RAM model of computation, we can count how many steps our algo-
rithm takes on any given input instance by executing it. However, to understand
how good or bad an algorithm is in general, we must know how it works over
all possible instances.

To understand the notions of the best, worst, and average-case complexity,
think about running an algorithm over all possible instances of data that can be
fed to it. For the problem of sorting, the set of possible input instances includes
every possible arrangement of n keys, for all possible values of n. We can
represent each input instance as a point on a graph (shown in Figure 2.1) where
the x-axis represents the size of the input problem (for sorting, the number of
items to sort), and the y-axis denotes the number of steps taken by the algorithm
in this instance.

1The Earth is not completely spherical either, but a spherical Earth provides a useful model

for such things as longitude and latitude.

2.1. THE RAM MODEL OF COMPUTATION

33

Number 
of Steps

Worst Case

Average Case

Best Case

1                     2                     3                    4     . . . . . .

n

Problem Size

Figure 2.1: Best-case, worst-case, and average-case complexity.

These points naturally align themselves into columns, because only integers
represent possible input sizes (e.g., it makes no sense to sort 10.57 items). We
can deﬁne three interesting functions over the plot of these points:

• The worst-case complexity of the algorithm is the function deﬁned by the
maximum number of steps taken in any instance of size n. This represents
the curve passing through the highest point in each column.

• The best-case complexity of the algorithm is the function deﬁned by the
minimum number of steps taken in any instance of size n. This represents
the curve passing through the lowest point of each column.

• The average-case complexity or expected time of the algorithm, which is
the function deﬁned by the average number of steps over all instances of
size n.

The worst-case complexity generally proves to be most useful of these three
measures in practice. Many people ﬁnd this counterintuitive. To illustrate why,
try to project what will happen if you bring $n into a casino to gamble. The
best case, that you walk out owning the place, is so unlikely that you should not
even think about it. The worst case, that you lose all $n, is easy to calculate
and distressingly likely to happen.

The average case, that the typical bettor loses 87.32% of the money that he
or she brings to the casino, is both diﬃcult to establish and its meaning subject
to debate. What exactly does average mean? Stupid people lose more than
smart people, so are you smarter or stupider than the average person, and by
how much? Card counters at blackjack do better on average than customers
who accept three or more free drinks. We avoid all these complexities and obtain
a very useful result by considering the worst case.

That said, average-case analysis for expected running time will prove very
important with respect to randomized algorithms, which use random numbers
If you make n independent $1 red-
to make decisions within the algorithm.
black bets on roulette in the casino, your expected loss is indeed well deﬁned at

34

CHAPTER 2. ALGORITHM ANALYSIS

$(2n/38), because American roulette wheels have eighteen red, eighteen black,
and two green slots 0 and 00 where every bet loses.

Take-Home Lesson: Each of these time complexities deﬁnes a numerical func-
tion for any given algorithm, representing running time as a function of input
size. These functions are just as well deﬁned as any other numerical function,
be it y = x2 − 2x + 1 or the price of Alphabet stock as a function of time. But
time complexities are such complicated functions that we must simplify them
for analysis using the “Big Oh” notation.

2.2 The Big Oh Notation

The best-case, worst-case, and average-case time complexities for any given
algorithm are numerical functions over the size of possible problem instances.
However, it is very diﬃcult to work precisely with these functions, because they
tend to:

• Have too many bumps – An algorithm such as binary search typically runs
a bit faster for arrays of size exactly n = 2k − 1 (where k is an integer),
because the array partitions work out nicely. This detail is not particularly
important, but it warns us that the exact time complexity function for any
algorithm is liable to be very complicated, with lots of little up and down
bumps as shown in Figure 2.2.

• Require too much detail to specify precisely – Counting the exact number
of RAM instructions executed in the worst case requires the algorithm be
speciﬁed to the detail of a complete computer program. Furthermore, the
precise answer depends upon uninteresting coding details (e.g. did the
code use a case statement or nested ifs?). Performing a precise worst-case
analysis like

T (n) = 12754n2 + 4353n + 834 lg2 n + 13546

would clearly be very diﬃcult work, but provides us little extra information
than the observation that “the time grows quadratically with n.”

It proves to be much easier to talk in terms of simple upper and lower bounds
of time-complexity functions using the Big Oh notation. The Big Oh simpliﬁes
our analysis by ignoring levels of detail that do not impact our comparison of
algorithms.

The Big Oh notation ignores the diﬀerence between multiplicative constants.
The functions f (n) = 2n and g(n) = n are identical in Big Oh analysis. This
makes sense given our application. Suppose a given algorithm in (say) C lan-
guage ran twice as fast as one with the same algorithm written in Java. This
multiplicative factor of two can tell us nothing about the algorithm itself, be-
cause both programs implement exactly the same algorithm. We should ignore
such constant factors when comparing two algorithms.

The formal deﬁnitions associated with the Big Oh notation are as follows:

2.2. THE BIG OH NOTATION

35

f(n)

n0

upper bound

lower bound

1

2 3

4

.......

n

Figure 2.2: Upper and lower bounds valid for n > n0 smooth out the behavior
of complex functions.

c · g(n)

f (n)

f (n)
c · g(n)

c1 · g(n)

f (n)
c2 · g(n)

n0

(a)

n0

(b)

n0

(c)

Figure 2.3: Illustrating notations: (a) f (n) = O(g(n)), (b) f (n) = Ω(g(n)), and
(c) f (n) = Θ(g(n)).

• f (n) = O(g(n)) means c · g(n) is an upper bound on f (n). Thus, there
exists some constant c such that f (n) ≤ c · g(n) for every large enough n
(that is, for all n ≥ n0, for some constant n0).

• f (n) = Ω(g(n)) means c · g(n) is a lower bound on f (n). Thus, there exists

some constant c such that f (n) ≥ c · g(n) for all n ≥ n0.

• f (n) = Θ(g(n)) means c1 · g(n) is an upper bound on f (n) and c2 · g(n)
is a lower bound on f (n), for all n ≥ n0. Thus, there exist constants c1
and c2 such that f (n) ≤ c1 · g(n) and f (n) ≥ c2 · g(n) for all n ≥ n0. This
means that g(n) provides a nice, tight bound on f (n).

Got it? These deﬁnitions are illustrated in Figure 2.3. Each of these deﬁ-
nitions assumes there is a constant n0 beyond which they are satisﬁed. We are
not concerned about small values of n, anything to the left of n0. After all,
we don’t really care whether one sorting algorithm sorts six items faster than

36

CHAPTER 2. ALGORITHM ANALYSIS

another, but we do need to know which algorithm proves faster when sorting
10,000 or 1,000,000 items. The Big Oh notation enables us to ignore details and
focus on the big picture.

Take-Home Lesson: The Big Oh notation and worst-case analysis are tools
that greatly simplify our ability to compare the eﬃciency of algorithms.

Make sure you understand this notation by working through the following
examples. Certain constants (c and n0) are chosen in the explanations below
because they work and make a point, but other pairs of constants will do exactly
the same job. You are free to choose any constants that maintain the same
inequality (ideally constants that make it obvious that the inequality holds):

f (n) = 3n2 − 100n + 6 = O(n2), because for c = 3, 3n2 > f (n);
f (n) = 3n2 − 100n + 6 = O(n3), because for c = 1, n3 > f (n) when n > 3;
f (n) = 3n2 − 100n + 6 (cid:6)= O(n), because for any c > 0, cn < f (n) when n > (c + 100)/3,

since n > (c + 100)/3 ⇒ 3n > c + 100 ⇒ 3n2 > cn + 100n > cn + 100n − 6
⇒ 3n2 − 100n + 6 = f (n) > cn;

f (n) = 3n2 − 100n + 6 = Ω(n2), because for c = 2, 2n2 < f (n) when n > 100;
f (n) = 3n2 − 100n + 6 (cid:6)= Ω(n3), because for any c > 0, f (n) < c · n3 when n > 3/c + 3;
f (n) = 3n2 − 100n + 6 = Ω(n), because for any c > 0, f (n) < 3n2 + 6n2 = 9n2,

which is < cn3 when n > max(9/c, 1);

f (n) = 3n2 − 100n + 6 = Θ(n2), because both O and Ω apply;
f (n) = 3n2 − 100n + 6 (cid:6)= Θ(n3), because only O applies;
f (n) = 3n2 − 100n + 6 (cid:6)= Θ(n), because only Ω applies.

The Big Oh notation provides for a rough notion of equality when comparing
functions. It is somewhat jarring to see an expression like n2 = O(n3), but its
meaning can always be resolved by going back to the deﬁnitions in terms of
upper and lower bounds. It is perhaps most instructive to read the “=” here as
meaning one of the functions that are. Clearly, n2 is one of the functions that
are O(n3).

Stop and Think: Back to the Deﬁnition

Problem: Is 2n+1 = Θ(2n)?

2.3. GROWTH RATES AND DOMINANCE RELATIONS

37

Solution: Designing novel algorithms requires cleverness and inspiration. How-
ever, applying the Big Oh notation is best done by swallowing any creative
instincts you may have. All Big Oh problems can be correctly solved by going
back to the deﬁnition and working with that.

• Is 2n+1 = O(2n)? Well, f (n) = O(g(n)) iﬀ there exists a constant c such
that for all suﬃciently large n, f (n) ≤ c · g(n). Is there? Yes, because
2n+1 = 2 · 2n, and clearly 2 · 2n ≤ c · 2n for any c ≥ 2.

• Is 2n+1 = Ω(2n)? Go back to the deﬁnition. f (n) = Ω(g(n)) iﬀ there
exists a constant c > 0 such that for all suﬃciently large n f (n) ≥ c · g(n).
This would be satisﬁed for any 0 < c ≤ 2. Together the Big Oh and Ω
bounds imply 2n+1 = Θ(2n).

Stop and Think: Hip to the Squares?

Problem: Is (x + y)2 = O(x2 + y2)?

Solution: Working with the Big Oh means going back to the deﬁnition at the
slightest sign of confusion. By deﬁnition, this expression is valid iﬀ we can ﬁnd
some c such that (x + y)2 ≤ c(x2 + y2) for all suﬃciently large x and y.

My ﬁrst move would be to expand the left side of the equation, that is,
(x + y)2 = x2 + 2xy + y2. If the middle 2xy term wasn’t there, the inequality
would clearly hold for any c > 1. But it is there, so we need to relate 2xy to
x2 + y2. What if x ≤ y? Then 2xy ≤ 2y2 ≤ 2(x2 + y2). What if x ≥ y? Then
2xy ≤ 2x2 ≤ 2(x2 + y2). Either way, we now can bound 2xy by two times the
right-side function x2 + y2. This means that (x + y)2 ≤ 3(x2 + y2), and so the
result holds.

2.3 Growth Rates and Dominance Relations

With the Big Oh notation, we cavalierly discard the multiplicative constants.
Thus, the functions f (n) = 0.001n2 and g(n) = 1000n2 are treated identically,
even though g(n) is a million times larger than f (n) for all values of n.

The reason why we are content with such coarse Big Oh analysis is provided
by Figure 2.4, which shows the growth rate of several common time analysis
functions. In particular, it shows how long algorithms that use f (n) operations
take to run on a fast computer, where each operation costs one nanosecond
(10−9 seconds). The following conclusions can be drawn from this table:

• All such algorithms take roughly the same time for n = 10.

• Any algorithm with n! running time becomes useless for n ≥ 20.

38

CHAPTER 2. ALGORITHM ANALYSIS

n
10
20
30
40
50
100
1,000
10,000
100,000
1,000,000
10,000,000
100,000,000
1,000,000,000

lg n
0.003 μs
0.004 μs
0.005 μs
0.005 μs
0.006 μs
0.007 μs
0.010 μs
0.013 μs
0.017 μs
0.020 μs
0.023 μs
0.027 μs
0.030 μs

n
0.01 μs
0.02 μs
0.03 μs
0.04 μs
0.05 μs
0.1 μs
1.00 μs
10 μs
0.10 ms
1 ms
0.01 sec
0.10 sec
1 sec

n lg n
0.033 μs
0.086 μs
0.147 μs
0.213 μs
0.282 μs
0.644 μs
9.966 μs
130 μs
1.67 ms
19.93 ms
0.23 sec
2.66 sec
29.90 sec

n2
0.1 μs
0.4 μs
0.9 μs
1.6 μs
2.5 μs
10 μs
1 ms
100 ms
10 sec
16.7 min
1.16 days
115.7 days
31.7 years

n!
3.63 ms
77.1 years
8.4 × 1015 yrs

2n
1 μs
1 ms
1 sec
18.3 min
13 days
4 × 1013 yrs

Figure 2.4: Running times of common functions measured in nanoseconds.
The function lg n denotes the base-2 logarithm of n.

• Algorithms whose running time is 2n have a greater operating range, but

become impractical for n >40.

• Quadratic-time algorithms, whose running time is n2, remain usable up
to about n = 10, 000, but quickly deteriorate with larger inputs. They are
likely to be hopeless for n > 1,000,000.

• Linear-time and n lg n algorithms remain practical on inputs of one billion

items.

• An O(lg n) algorithm hardly sweats for any imaginable value of n.

The bottom line is that even ignoring constant factors, we get an excellent
idea of whether a given algorithm is appropriate for a problem of a given size.

2.3.1 Dominance Relations

The Big Oh notation groups functions into a set of classes, such that all the
functions within a particular class are essentially equivalent. Functions f (n) =
0.34n and g(n) = 234,234n belong in the same class, namely those that are order
Θ(n). Furthermore, when two functions f and g belong to diﬀerent classes, they
are diﬀerent with respect to our notation, meaning either f (n) = O(g(n)) or
g(n) = O(f (n)), but not both.

We say that a faster growing function dominates a slower growing one, just
as a faster growing company eventually comes to dominate the laggard. When
f and g belong to diﬀerent classes (i.e. f (n) (cid:6)= Θ(g(n))), we say g dominates f
when f (n) = O(g(n)). This is sometimes written g (cid:12) f .

The good news is that only a few diﬀerent function classes tend to occur
in the course of basic algorithm analysis. These suﬃce to cover almost all the
algorithms we will discuss in this text, and are listed in order of increasing
dominance:

2.4. WORKING WITH THE BIG OH

39

• Constant functions, f (n) = 1: Such functions might measure the cost
of adding two numbers, printing out “The Star Spangled Banner,” or
the growth realized by functions such as f (n) = min(n, 100). In the big
picture, there is no dependence on the parameter n.

• Logarithmic functions, f (n) = log n: Logarithmic time complexity shows
up in algorithms such as binary search. Such functions grow quite slowly
as n gets big, but faster than the constant function (which is standing
still, after all). Logarithms will be discussed in more detail in Section 2.7
(page 48).

• Linear functions, f (n) = n: Such functions measure the cost of looking
at each item once (or twice, or ten times) in an n-element array, say to
identify the biggest item, the smallest item, or compute the average value.

• Superlinear functions, f (n) = n lg n: This important class of functions
arises in such algorithms as quicksort and mergesort. They grow just a
little faster than linear (recall Figure 2.4), but enough so to rise to a higher
dominance class.

• Quadratic functions, f (n) = n2: Such functions measure the cost of look-
ing at most or all pairs of items in an n-element universe. These arise in
algorithms such as insertion sort and selection sort.

• Cubic functions, f (n) = n3: Such functions enumerate all triples of items
in an n-element universe. These also arise in certain dynamic program-
ming algorithms, to be developed in Chapter 10.

• Exponential functions, f (n) = cn for a given constant c > 1: Functions
like 2n arise when enumerating all subsets of n items. As we have seen,
exponential algorithms become useless fast, but not as fast as. . .

• Factorial functions, f (n) = n!: Functions like n! arise when generating all

permutations or orderings of n items.

The intricacies of dominance relations will be further discussed in Section

2.10.2 (page 58). However, all you really need to understand is that:

n! (cid:12) 2n (cid:12) n3 (cid:12) n2 (cid:12) n log n (cid:12) n (cid:12) log n (cid:12) 1

Take-Home Lesson: Although esoteric functions arise in advanced algorithm
analysis, a small set of time complexities suﬃce for most algorithms we will see
in this book.

2.4 Working with the Big Oh

You learned how to do simpliﬁcations of algebraic expressions back in high
school. Working with the Big Oh requires dusting oﬀ these tools. Most of what
you learned there still holds in working with the Big Oh, but not everything.

40

CHAPTER 2. ALGORITHM ANALYSIS

2.4.1 Adding Functions

The sum of two functions is governed by the dominant one, namely:

f (n) + g(n) → Θ(max(f (n), g(n)))

This is very useful in simplifying expressions: for example it gives us that
n3 + n2 + n + 1 = Θ(n3). Everything else is small potatoes besides the dominant
term.

The intuition is as follows. At least half the bulk of f (n) + g(n) must come
from the larger value. The dominant function will, by deﬁnition, provide the
larger value as n → ∞. Thus, dropping the smaller function from consideration
reduces the value by at most a factor of 1/2, which is just a multiplicative
constant. For example, if f (n) = O(n2) and g(n) = O(n2), then f (n) + g(n) =
O(n2) as well.

2.4.2 Multiplying Functions

Multiplication is like repeated addition. Consider multiplication by any constant
c > 0, be it 1.02 or 1,000,000. Multiplying a function by a constant cannot aﬀect
its asymptotic behavior, because we can multiply the bounding constants in the
Big Oh analysis to account for it. Thus,

O(c · f (n)) → O(f (n))
Ω(c · f (n)) → Ω(f (n))
Θ(c · f (n)) → Θ(f (n))

Of course, c must be strictly positive (i.e. c > 0) to avoid any funny business,
since we can wipe out even the fastest growing function by multiplying it by
zero.

On the other hand, when two functions in a product are increasing, both
are important. An O(n! log n) function dominates n! by just as much as log n
dominates 1. In general,

O(f (n)) · O(g(n)) → O(f (n) · g(n))
Ω(f (n)) · Ω(g(n)) → Ω(f (n) · g(n))
Θ(f (n)) · Θ(g(n)) → Θ(f (n) · g(n))

Stop and Think: Transitive Experience

Problem:
O(g(n)) and g(n) = O(h(n)), then f (n) = O(h(n)).

Show that Big Oh relationships are transitive. That is, if f (n) =

Solution: We always go back to the deﬁnition when working with the Big Oh.
What we need to show here is that f (n) ≤ c3 · h(n) for n > n3 given that

2.5. REASONING ABOUT EFFICIENCY

41

f (n) ≤ c1 · g(n) and g(n) ≤ c2 · h(n), for n > n1 and n > n2, respectively.
Cascading these inequalities, we get that

f (n) ≤ c1 · g(n) ≤ c1c2 · h(n)

for n > n3 = max(n1, n2).

2.5 Reasoning about Eﬃciency

Coarse reasoning about an algorithm’s running time is usually easy, given a
precise description of the algorithm. In this section, I will work through several
examples, perhaps in greater detail than necessary.

2.5.1 Selection Sort

Here we’ll analyze the selection sort algorithm, which repeatedly identiﬁes the
smallest remaining unsorted element and puts it at the end of the sorted portion
of the array. An animation of selection sort in action appears in Figure 2.5, and
the code is shown below:

void selection_sort(item_type s[], int n) {

int i, j;
int min;

/* counters */
/* index of minimum */

for (i = 0; i<

n; i++) {

min = i;
for (j = i + 1; j<

n; j++) {

if (s[j] < s[min]) {

min = j;

}

}
swap(&s[i], &s[min]);

}

}

The outer for loop goes around n times. The nested inner loop goes around
n − (i + 1) times, where i is the index of the outer loop. The exact number of
times the if statement is executed is given by:

n−1

n−1

n−1

T (n) =

1 =

n − i − 1

i=0
(cid:7)

j=i+1
(cid:7)

i=0
(cid:7)

What this sum is doing is adding up the non-negative integers in decreasing
order starting from n − 1, that is,

T (n) = (n − 1) + (n − 2) + (n − 3) + . . . + 2 + 1

42

CHAPTER 2. ALGORITHM ANALYSIS

C

I
L

S  E  L  E       T  I  O  N  S  O  R  T
EC
L  E  S  T  I  O  N  S  O  R  T
E
C E
L       S  T  I  O  N  S  O  R  T
C E E
L  S  T      O  N  S  O  R  T
C E E I
S  T      O  N  S  O  R  T
C E E
L
T  S  O       S  O  R  T
N
I
L N
I
E
C E
O
S       T  S  O  R  T
I
O
N
E E
L
C
S  T  S       R  T
O
N O
O
E
I
C
L
E
T  S  S       T
R
O
O
R
N
I
L
S  T  T
E
C
E
T  T
L
O
R
S
I
N
O
C
E
E
S
L
N
OO
R
T
T
I
E
E
C
S
T
R
T
L N O
O
C
E
I
E
N
O O
S
L
R
T
T
I
E
E
C

S
S
S
S
S

Figure 2.5: Animation of selection sort in action.

How can we reason about such a formula? We must solve the summation
formula using the techniques of Section 2.6 (page 46) to get an exact value. But,
with the Big Oh, we are only interested in the order of the expression. One way
to think about it is that we are adding up n − 1 terms, whose average value is
about n/2. This yields T (n) ≈ (n − 1)n/2 =O (n2).

Proving the Theta

Another way to think about this algorithm’s running time is in terms of upper
and lower bounds. We have n terms at most, each of which is at most n − 1.
Thus, T (n) ≤ n(n − 1) = O(n2). The Big Oh is an upper bound.

The Big Ω is a lower bound. Looking at the sum again, we have n/2 terms
each of which is bigger than n/2, followed by n/2 terms each greater than zero..
Thus, T (n) ≥ (n/2) · (n/2) + (n/2) · 0 = Ω(n2). Together with the Big Oh
result, this tells us that the running time is Θ(n2), meaning that selection sort
is quadratic.

Generally speaking, turning a Big Oh worst-case analysis into a Big Θ in-
volves identifying a bad input instance that forces the algorithm to perform as
poorly as possible. But selection sort is distinctive among sorting algorithms
in that it takes exactly the same time on all n! possible input instances. Since
T (n) = n(n − 1)/2 for all n ≥ 0, T (n) = Θ(n2).

2.5.2

Insertion Sort

A basic rule of thumb in Big Oh analysis is that worst-case running time fol-
lows from multiplying the largest number of times each nested loop can iterate.
Consider the insertion sort algorithm presented on page 3, whose inner loops
are repeated here:

2.5. REASONING ABOUT EFFICIENCY

43

for (i = 1; i<
j = i;
while ((j > 0) && (s[j] < s[j - 1])) {

n; i++) {

swap(&s[j], &s[j - 1]);
j = j-1;

}

}

How often does the inner while loop iterate? This is tricky because there
are two diﬀerent stopping conditions: one to prevent us from running oﬀ the
bounds of the array (j > 0) and the other to mark when the element ﬁnds its
proper place in sorted order (s[j] < s[j − 1]). Since worst-case analysis seeks an
upper bound on the running time, we ignore the early termination and assume
that this loop always goes around i times.
In fact, we can simplify further
and assume it always goes around n times since i < n. Since the outer loop
goes around n times, insertion sort must be a quadratic-time algorithm, that is,
O(n2).

This crude “round it up” analysis always does the job, in that the Big Oh
running time bound you get will always be correct. Occasionally, it might be
too pessimistic, meaning the actual worst-case time might be of a lower order
than implied by such analysis. Still, I strongly encourage this kind of reasoning
as a basis for simple algorithm analysis.

Proving the Theta

The worst case for insertion sort occurs when each newly inserted element must
slide all the way to the front of the sorted region. This happens if the input
is given in reverse sorted order. Each of the last n/2 elements of the input
must slide over at least n/2 elements to ﬁnd the correct position, taking at least
(n/2)2 = Ω(n2) time.

2.5.3 String Pattern Matching

Pattern matching is the most fundamental algorithmic operation on text strings.
This algorithm implements the ﬁnd command available in any web browser or
text editor:

Problem: Substring Pattern Matching
Input: A text string t and a pattern string p.
Output: Does t contain the pattern p as a substring, and if so, where?

Perhaps you are interested in ﬁnding where “Skiena” appears in a given news
article (well, I would be interested in such a thing). This is an instance of string
pattern matching with t as the news article and p = “Skiena”.

There is a fairly straightforward algorithm for string pattern matching that
considers the possibility that p may start at each possible position in t and then
tests if this is so.

44

CHAPTER 2. ALGORITHM ANALYSIS

a   b b
a

a
b   b   a
ba

a   b
a

b   a
a
b
b   b   a
a   b   b   a

a   b   a   a   b   a   b   b   a   b   a

Figure 2.6: Searching for the substring abba in the text abaababbaba. Blue
characters represent pattern-text matches, with red characters mismatches. The
search stops as soon as a match is found.

int findmatch(char *p, char *t) {

int i, j;
int plen, tlen;

/* counters */
/* string lengths */

plen = strlen(p);
tlen = strlen(t);

for (i = 0; i<=
j = 0;
while ((j < plen) && (t[i + j] == p[j])) {

(tlen-plen); i = i + 1) {

j = j + 1;

}
if (j == plen) {

return(i);

/* location of the first match */

}

}
return(-1);

}

/* there is no match */

What is the worst-case running time of these two nested loops? The inner
while loop goes around at most m times, and potentially far less when the
pattern match fails. This, plus two other statements, lies within the outer for
loop. The outer loop goes around at most n − m times, since no complete
alignment is possible once we get too far to the right of the text. The time
complexity of nested loops multiplies, so this gives a worst-case running time of
O((n − m)(m + 2)).

We did not count the time it takes to compute the length of the strings using
the function strlen. Since the implementation of strlen is not given, we must
guess how long it should take. If it explicitly counts the number of characters
until it hits the end of the string, this will take time linear in the length of the
string. Thus, the total worst-case running time is O(n + m + (n − m)(m + 2)).
Let’s use our knowledge of the Big Oh to simplify things. Since m + 2 =
Θ(m), the “+2” isn’t interesting, so we are left with O(n + m + (n − m)m).

2.5. REASONING ABOUT EFFICIENCY

45

Multiplying this out yields O(n + m + nm − m2), which still seems kind of ugly.
However, in any interesting problem we know that n ≥ m, since p can’t be a
substring of t when the pattern is longer than the text itself. One consequence
of this is that n + m ≤ 2n = Θ(n). Thus, our worst-case running time simpliﬁes
further to O(n + nm − m2).

Two more observations and we are done. First, note that n ≤ nm, since
m ≥ 1 in any interesting pattern. Thus, n + nm = Θ(nm), and we can drop the
additive n, simplifying our analysis to O(nm − m2).

Finally, observe that the −m2 term is negative, and thus only serves to
lower the value within. Since the Big Oh gives an upper bound, we can drop
any negative term without invalidating the upper bound. The inequality n ≥ m
implies that mn ≥ m2, so the negative term is not big enough to cancel the term
that is left. Thus, we can express the worst-case running time of this algorithm
simply as O(nm).

After you get enough experience, you will be able to do such an algorithm
analysis in your head without even writing the algorithm down. After all, algo-
rithm design for a given task involves mentally riﬂing through diﬀerent possibil-
ities and selecting the best approach. This kind of ﬂuency comes with practice,
but if you are confused about why a given algorithm runs in O(f (n)) time, start
by writing the algorithm out carefully and then employ the kind of reasoning
we used in this section.

Proving the Theta

The analysis above gives a quadratic-time upper bound on the running time of
this simple pattern matching algorithm. To prove the theta, we must show an
example where it actually does take Ω(mn) time.

Consider what happens when the text t = “aaaa . . . aaaa” is a string of n
a’s, and the pattern p = “aaaa . . . aaab” is a string of m − 1 a’s followed by a b.
Wherever the pattern is positioned on the text, the while loop will successfully
match the ﬁrst m − 1 characters before failing on the last one. There are
n − m + 1 possible positions where p can sit on t without overhanging the end,
so the running time is:

(n − m + 1)(m) = mn − m2 + m = Ω(mn)

Thus, this string matching algorithm runs in worst-case Θ(nm) time. Faster
indeed we will see an expected linear-time algorithm for

algorithms do exist:
this problem in Section 6.7.

2.5.4 Matrix Multiplication

Nested summations often arise in the analysis of algorithms with nested loops.
Consider the problem of matrix multiplication:

46

CHAPTER 2. ALGORITHM ANALYSIS

Problem: Matrix Multiplication
Input: Two matrices, A (of dimension x × y) and B (dimension y × z).
Output: An x × z matrix C where C[i][j] is the dot product of the ith row of A
and the jth column of B.

Matrix multiplication is a fundamental operation in linear algebra, presented
with an entry in the catalog in Section 16.3 (page 472). That said, the elemen-
tary algorithm for matrix multiplication is implemented as three nested loops:

for (i = 1; i<=

a->rows; i++) {

for (j = 1; j<=

b->columns; j++) {

c->m[i][j] = 0;
for (k = 1; k<=

b->rows; k++) {

c->m[i][j] += a->m[i][k] * b->m[k][j];

}

}

}

How can we analyze the time complexity of this algorithm? Three nested
loops should smell O(n3) to you by this point, but let’s be precise. The number
of multiplications M (x, y, z) is given by the following summation:

x

y

z

M (x, y, z) =

1

i=1
(cid:7)

j=1
(cid:7)

k=1
(cid:7)

Sums get evaluated from the right inward. The sum of z ones is z, so

x

y

M (x, y, z) =

z

The sum of y z’s is just as simple, yz, so

i=1
(cid:7)

j=1
(cid:7)

x

Finally, the sum of x yz’s is xyz.

i=1
(cid:7)

M (x, y, z) =

yz

Thus, the running of this matrix multiplication algorithm is O(xyz). If we
consider the common case where all three dimensions are the same, this becomes
O(n3). The same analysis holds for an Ω(n3) lower bound, because the matrix
dimensions govern the number of iterations of the for loops. Simple matrix
multiplication is a cubic algorithm that runs in Θ(n3) time. Faster algorithms
exist: see Section 16.3.

2.6 Summations

Mathematical summation formulae are important to us for two reasons. First,
they often arise in algorithm analysis. Second, proving the correctness of such

2.6. SUMMATIONS

47

formulae is a classic application of mathematical induction. Several exercises on
inductive proofs of summations appear as exercises at the end of this chapter.
To make them more accessible, I review the basics of summations here.

Summation formulae are concise expressions describing the addition of an

arbitrarily large set of numbers, in particular the formula

f (i) = f (1) + f (2) + . . . + f (n)

n

i=1
(cid:7)

Simple closed forms exist for summations of many algebraic functions. For

example, since the sum of n ones is n,

1 =n

n

i=1
(cid:7)

When n is even, the sum of the ﬁrst n = 2k integers can be seen by pairing up
the ith and (n − i + 1)th integers:

n

k

i =

(i + (2k − i + 1)) = k(2k + 1) = n(n + 1)/2

i=1
(cid:7)

i=1
(cid:7)

The same result holds for odd n with slightly more careful analysis.

Recognizing two basic classes of summation formulae will get you a long way

in algorithm analysis:

• Sum of a power of integers – We encountered the sum of the ﬁrst n positive
n
i=1 i = n(n + 1)/2 in the analysis of selection sort.
integers S(n) =
From the big picture perspective, the important thing is that the sum is
quadratic, not that the constant is 1/2. In general,

(cid:3)

n

S(n, p) =

ip = Θ(np+1)

i=1
(cid:7)

for p ≥ 0. Thus, the sum of squares is cubic, and the sum of cubes is
quartic (if you use such a word).
For p < −1, this sum S(n, p) always converges to a constant as n → ∞,
while for p ≥ 0 it diverges. The interesting case between these is the
Harmonic numbers, H(n) =

n
i=1 1/i = Θ(log n).

• Sum of a geometric progression – In geometric progressions, the index of

(cid:3)

the loop aﬀects the exponent, that is,

n

G(n, a) =

ai = (an+1 − 1)/(a − 1)

i=0
(cid:7)

How we interpret this sum depends upon the base of the progression, in
this case a. When |a| < 1, G(n, a) converges to a constant as n → ∞.

48

CHAPTER 2. ALGORITHM ANALYSIS

This series convergence proves to be the great “free lunch” of algorithm
analysis.
It means that the sum of a linear number of things can be
constant, not linear. For example, 1 + 1/2 + 1/4 + 1/8 +. . . ≤ 2 no matter
how many terms we add up.
When a > 1, the sum grows rapidly with each new term, as in 1 + 2 + 4 +
8 + 16 + 32 = 63. Indeed, G(n, a) = Θ(an+1) for a > 1.

Stop and Think: Factorial Formulae

Problem: Prove that

n

i=1 i × i! = (n + 1)! − 1 by induction.

(cid:3)

Solution: The inductive paradigm is straightforward. First verify the basis
case. The case n = 0 gives an empty sum, which by deﬁnition evaluates to 0.
Alternately we can do n = 1:

i × i! = 1 and (1 + 1)! − 1 = 2 − 1 = 1

1

i=1
(cid:7)

Now assume the statement is true up to n. To prove the general case of

n + 1, observe that separating out the largest term

n+1

i=1
(cid:7)

i × i! = (n + 1) × (n + 1)! +

i × i!

n

i=1
(cid:7)

reveals the left side of our inductive assumption. Substituting the right side
gives us

n+1

i=1
(cid:7)

i × i! = (n + 1) × (n + 1)! + (n + 1)! − 1

= (n + 1)! × ((n + 1) + 1) − 1
= (n + 2)! − 1

This general trick of separating out the largest term from the summation
to reveal an instance of the inductive assumption lies at the heart of all such
proofs.

2.7 Logarithms and Their Applications

Logarithm is an anagram of algorithm, but that’s not why we need to know
what logarithms are. You’ve seen the button on your calculator, but may have
forgotten why it is there. A logarithm is simply an inverse exponential function.
Saying bx = y is equivalent to saying that x = logb y. Further, this equivalence
is the same as saying blogb y = y.

2.7. LOGARITHMS AND THEIR APPLICATIONS

49

0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
1   
0
1   
1
1  
1

0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1

Figure 2.7: A height h tree with d children per node has dh leaves. Here h = 3
and d = 3 (left). The number of bit patterns grows exponentially with pattern
length (right). These would be described by the root-to-leaf paths of a binary
tree of height h = 3.

Exponential functions grow at a distressingly fast rate, as anyone who has
ever tried to pay oﬀ a credit card balance understands. Thus, inverse exponential
functions (logarithms) grow refreshingly slowly. Logarithms arise in any process
where things are repeatedly halved. We’ll now look at several examples.

2.7.1 Logarithms and Binary Search

Binary search is a good example of an O(log n) algorithm. To locate a particular
person p in a telephone book2 containing n names, you start by comparing
p against the middle, or (n/2)nd name, say Monroe, Marilyn. Regardless of
whether p belongs before this middle name (Dean, James) or after it (Presley,
Elvis), after just one comparison you can discard one half of all the names
in the book. The number of steps the algorithm takes equals the number of
times we can halve n until only one name is left. By deﬁnition, this is exactly
log2 n. Thus, twenty comparisons suﬃce to ﬁnd any name in the million-name
Manhattan phone book!

Binary search is one of the most powerful ideas in algorithm design. This
power becomes apparent if we imagine trying to ﬁnd a name in an unsorted
telephone book.

2.7.2 Logarithms and Trees

A binary tree of height 1 can have up to 2 leaf nodes, while a tree of height 2
can have up to 4 leaves. What is the height h of a rooted binary tree with n
leaf nodes? Note that the number of leaves doubles every time we increase the
height by 1. To account for n leaves, n = 2h, which implies that h = log2 n.

What if we generalize to trees that have d children, where d = 2 for the case
of binary trees? A tree of height 1 can have up to d leaf nodes, while one of
height 2 can have up to d2 leaves. The number of possible leaves multiplies by
d every time we increase the height by 1, so to account for n leaves, n = dh,
which implies that h = logd n, as shown in Figure 2.7.

2If necessary, ask your grandmother what telephone books were.

50

CHAPTER 2. ALGORITHM ANALYSIS

The punch line here is that short trees can have very many leaves, which is
the main reason why binary trees prove fundamental to the design of fast data
structures.

2.7.3 Logarithms and Bits

There are two bit patterns of length 1 (0 and 1), four of length 2 (00, 01, 10,
and 11), and eight of length 3 (see Figure 2.7 (right)). How many bits w do we
need to represent any one of n diﬀerent possibilities, be it one of n items or the
integers from 0 to n − 1?

The key observation is that there must be at least n diﬀerent bit patterns
of length w. Since the number of diﬀerent bit patterns doubles as you add each
bit, we need at least w bits where 2w = n. In other words, we need w = log2 n
bits.

2.7.4 Logarithms and Multiplication

Logarithms were particularly important in the days before pocket calculators.
They provided the easiest way to multiply big numbers by hand, either implicitly
using a slide rule or explicitly by using a book of logarithms.

Logarithms are still useful for multiplication, particularly for exponentiation.
Recall that loga(xy) = loga(x) + loga(y); that is, the log of a product is the sum
of the logs. A direct consequence of this is

loga nb = b · loga n

How can we compute ab for any a and b using the exp(x) and ln(x) functions
on your calculator, where exp(x) = ex and ln(x) = loge(x)? We know

ab = exp(ln(ab)) = exp(b ln(a))

so the problem is reduced to one multiplication plus one call to each of these
functions.

2.7.5 Fast Exponentiation

Suppose that we need to exactly compute the value of an for some reasonably
large n. Such problems occur in primality testing for cryptography, as dis-
cussed in Section 16.8 (page 490). Issues of numerical precision prevent us from
applying the formula above.

The simplest algorithm performs n − 1 multiplications, by computing a × a ×
. . . × a. However, we can do better by observing that n = (cid:8)n/2(cid:9) + (cid:13)n/2(cid:14). If n
is even, then an = (an/2)2. If n is odd, then an = a(a(cid:3)n/2(cid:4))2. In either case, we
have halved the size of our exponent at the cost of, at most, two multiplications,
so O(lg n) multiplications suﬃce to compute the ﬁnal value.

2.7. LOGARITHMS AND THEIR APPLICATIONS

51

function power(a, n)

if (n = 0) return(1)
x = power(a, (cid:8)n/2(cid:9))
if (n is even) then return(x2)
else return(a × x2)

This simple algorithm illustrates an important principle of divide and con-
quer. It always pays to divide a job as evenly as possible. When n is not a power
of two, the problem cannot always be divided perfectly evenly, but a diﬀerence
of one element between the two sides as shown here cannot cause any serious
imbalance.

2.7.6 Logarithms and Summations

The Harmonic numbers arise as a special case of a sum of a power of inte-
gers, namely H(n) = S(n, −1). They are the sum of the progression of simple
reciprocals, namely,

n

H(n) =

1/i = Θ(log n)

i=1
(cid:7)

The Harmonic numbers prove important, because they usually explain “where
the log comes from” when one magically pops out from algebraic manipulation.
For example, the key to analyzing the average-case complexity of quicksort is
n
i=1 1/i. Employing the Harmonic number’s Θ bound imme-
the summation n
diately reduces this to Θ(n log n).

(cid:3)

2.7.7 Logarithms and Criminal Justice

Figure 2.8 will be our ﬁnal example of logarithms in action. This table appears
in the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, used by courts throughout the United
States. These guidelines are an attempt to standardize criminal sentences, so
that a felon convicted of a crime before one judge receives the same sentence
that they would before a diﬀerent judge. To accomplish this, the judges have
prepared an intricate point function to score the depravity of each crime and
map it to time-to-serve.

Figure 2.8 gives the actual point function for fraud—a table mapping dollars
stolen to points. Notice that the punishment increases by one level each time
the amount of money stolen roughly doubles. That means that the level of
punishment (which maps roughly linearly to the amount of time served) grows
logarithmically with the amount of money stolen.

Think for a moment about the consequences of this. Many a corrupt CEO
certainly has. It means that your total sentence grows extremely slowly with
the amount of money you steal. Embezzling an additional $100,000 gets you
3 additional punishment levels if you’ve already stolen $10,000, adds only 1
level if you’ve stolen $50,000, and has no eﬀect if you’ve stolen a million. The
corresponding beneﬁt of stealing really large amounts of money becomes even

52

CHAPTER 2. ALGORITHM ANALYSIS

Loss (apply the greatest)
(A) $2,000 or less
(B) More than $2,000
(C) More than $5,000
(D) More than $10,000
(E) More than $20,000
(F) More than $40,000
(G) More than $70,000
(H) More than $120,000
(I) More than $200,000
(J) More than $350,000
(K) More than $500,000
(L) More than $800,000
(M) More than $1,500,000
(N) More than $2,500,000
(O) More than $5,000,000
(P) More than $10,000,000
(Q) More than $20,000,000
(R) More than $40,000,000
(S) More than $80,000,000

Increase in level
no increase
add 1
add 2
add 3
add 4
add 5
add 6
add 7
add 8
add 9
add 10
add 11
add 12
add 13
add 14
add 15
add 16
add 17
add 18

Figure 2.8: The Federal Sentencing Guidelines for fraud

greater. The moral of logarithmic growth is clear: If you’re gonna do the crime,
make it worth the time!3

Take-Home Lesson: Logarithms arise whenever things are repeatedly halved
or doubled.

2.8 Properties of Logarithms

As we have seen, stating bx = y is equivalent to saying that x = logb y. The
b term is known as the base of the logarithm. Three bases are of particular
importance for mathematical and historical reasons:

• Base b = 2: The binary logarithm, usually denoted lg x, is a base 2 loga-
rithm. We have seen how this base arises whenever repeated halving (i.e.,
binary search) or doubling (i.e., nodes in trees) occurs. Most algorithmic
applications of logarithms imply binary logarithms.

• Base b = e: The natural logarithm, usually denoted ln x, is a base e =
2.71828 . . . logarithm. The inverse of ln x is the exponential function
exp(x) = ex on your calculator. Thus, composing these functions gives us
the identity function,

3Life imitates art. After publishing this example in the previous edition, I was approached

by the U.S. Sentencing Commission seeking insights to improve these guidelines.

exp(ln x) = x and ln(exp x) = x

2.8. PROPERTIES OF LOGARITHMS

53

• Base b = 10: Less common today is the base-10 or common logarithm, usu-
ally denoted as log x. This base was employed in slide rules and logarithm
books in the days before pocket calculators.

We have already seen one important property of logarithms, namely that

loga(xy) = loga(x) + loga(y)

The other important fact to remember is that it is easy to convert a logarithm
from one base to another. This is a consequence of the following formula:

loga b =

logc b
logc a

Thus, changing the base of log b from base-a to base-c simply involves multi-
plying by logc a. It is easy to convert a common log function to a natural log
function, and vice versa.

Two implications of these properties of logarithms are important to appre-

ciate from an algorithmic perspective:

• The base of the logarithm has no real impact on the growth rate: Compare
the following three values: log2(1, 000, 000) = 19.9316, log3(1, 000, 000) =
12.5754, and log100(1, 000, 000) = 3. A big change in the base of the
logarithm produces little diﬀerence in the value of the log. Changing the
base of the log from a to c involves multiplying by logc a. This conversion
factor is absorbed in the Big Oh notation whenever a and c are constants.
Thus, we are usually justiﬁed in ignoring the base of the logarithm when
analyzing algorithms.

• Logarithms cut any function down to size: The growth rate of the loga-

rithm of any polynomial function is O(lg n). This follows because

loga nb = b · loga n

The eﬀectiveness of binary search on a wide range of problems is a con-
sequence of this observation. Note that performing a binary search on a
sorted array of n2 things requires only twice as many comparisons as a
binary search on n things.

Logarithms eﬃciently cut any function down to size.
arithmetic on factorials except after taking logarithms, since

It is hard to do

n

n! =

i → log n! =

i=1
(cid:4)

n

i=1
(cid:7)

log i = Θ(n log n)

provides another way logarithms pop up in algorithm analysis.

